---
title: "Stuart"
description: "But along comes a spanner in the works to shake things up – that is to be humble. And ironically, saying that is almost arrogant. I think that is the scariest part, because consciously being humble is so nearly impossible to do."
slug: "stuart"
image: stuart.jpg
keywords: ""
categories: 
    - ""
    - ""
date: 2018-09-01T22:26:13-05:00
draft: false
---

### 1.	What are you still learning and grappling with about yourself and how you tend to approach issues of reconciliation?

A major thing that I am still getting to grips with is understanding both sides of the enormity of the issue. I think a place to start here would be to wrestle with what does it mean to do wrong to someone? What is the aetiology of the underlying mechanism needing reconciliation? It’s almost like a festering disease that just won’t go away. Looking back though humanity’s history we see time and again humans driving gaping wounds into one another. One people group after another rises to the pinnacle of power whilst all others succumb to defeat. It’s as if we have an autoimmune disease – there is something in us, each of us that drives us to dominate others. Outside of this situation we can see clearly that this is wrong – somewhere in us our moral framework twitches, why? 

In a sense I working through the human condition – I say condition because it seems as though humans are indeed sick, history and likely our experience (of both ourselves and others) has proved that. It seems strange then that despite the technological advancements we have failed miserably to acknowledge a unilateral solution to our predicament. I’d argue that a major contributor to this problem is a naturalistic philosophy where we view the world, other people and ourselves as simply collections of chemicals, acting on our instinctive autonomy and failing to acknowledge intrinsic value in other people. If physics and chemistry are all that make up our “experiences” then who is to say might and strength isn’t right? There is no atom, element, or chemical compound that can objective dictate right and wrong – a topic about which we as humans seem to have a lot to say, particularly concerning reconciliation and justice. Where does this passion concerning come from? 

Something I think I am noticing more and more after listening to stories, seeing peoples' pain and anger come forth is two common elements. Not everyone might share these two desires but they are two things i am noticing over and over again. The first is obviously justice, some kind of reparation for the wrong that has been done. There is passion here - one that is often just but that can also lead to the same wrong being committed by the victim. That is a difficult discussion but an observation nonetheless. And the other is a request or even a plea for forgiveness or even mercy on the part of the perpetrator. How should we respond to this because it is an important discussion. This thought might come up against some opposition but I say this not to find an escape route for the perpetrator but because if we were entirely consistent in our judgements we would then fall onto our own sword for who can say that they have never wronged another? There must be a unilateral solution otherwise we might as well all pack up and go home.

### 2.	Are there any fundamental beliefs you have about the world, about yourself, and about others that you’re afraid of having challenged? Why do you think this is the case?

Some of what I mentioned above resonates with this – although I don’t feel “afraid” but rather an awareness. I acknowledge my imperfections and my flaws, that they will never entirely be overcome. One of these is strong convictions which can often come across as stubbornness or even arrogance. Acknowledging personal imperfections is one thing but here comes the vicious triangle. Immediately following that comes a sense of purpose to better yourself whilst still being authentic. But along comes a spanner in the works to shake things up – that is to be humble. And ironically, saying that is almost arrogant. I think that is the scariest part, because consciously being humble is so nearly impossible to do. Arguably one of the greatest catch-22s. C. S. Lewis sums this up pretty neatly I think:

>To even get near [humility], even for a moment, is like a drink of cold water to a man in a desert.
Do not imagine that if you meet a really humble man he will be what most people call “humble” nowadays: he will not be a sort of greasy, smarmy person, who is always telling you that, of course, he is nobody.
Probably all you will think about him is that he seemed a cheerful, intelligent chap who took a real interest in what you said to him.
If you do dislike him it will be because you feel a little envious of anyone who seems to enjoy life so easily. He will not be thinking about humility: he will not be thinking about himself at all.
>
>—C.S. Lewis ~ Mere Christianity, The Great Sin

If anything I think the humility process is something to be fearful of, having a healthy reverence for it.

### 3.	What has shifted for you personally since the July workshop? Get specific. Maybe share stories of what’s changed.

A major shifting point for me was seeing how afflicted many people are – across all sectors of society. I am not saying that I have been blind to this, but rather that the July workshop exposed myself, and presumably many others to the very personal struggles and battles our peers are facing. There was not a single person who was or still is struggling with something, to me that acts as a strong reminder and is a major motivating factor behind me sharing my thoughts about the human condition.

For a long time I have seen myself as a teacher but much of my prospects seem to be limited to the natural sciences, something which I am comfortable with and see value in. I also have a growing desire to expand the skills I have gathered within this discipline and merge them with other sectors. Studying ecosystems teaches on to develop "systems perspective" when understanding how to solve problems. Because of this ecosystems have a lot to offer society as I feel we can use them as an experimental platform to explore not only conservation and agricultural related issues but also societal iterations under increased resource demands and greater climatic instability to solve interesting and important social problems. 

Where do I see this going? I see a new avenue opening up for me to explore - trying to bring ecological theory into urban and human environmental. One of the underlying principles of ecosystem management is balance - too much of one thing quickly leads to instability, particularly during trying times. On the other hand diverse ecosystems contain intrinsic resilience allowing them to survive dramatic perturbations. Maybe the same is true for human systems where a diversity of people and ideas can encourage resilience through trying circumstances?

### 4.	At the workshop you made some personal commitments regarding what you wanted to reconcile in your own life (“letting go, letting come”). How is that going? Where have you shifted and where do you feel “stuck?”

It has been a bit of a whirlwind since our last workshop but looking back on my notes from that session has brought back up to the surface what I was going through then. My struggle is with two aspects of my life - with my work and with my relationships/attitude with others. 

From young I have had a passion for agriculture - I spent many school holidays vising family friends' farms and since beginning my tertiary studies I have spent most of my undergraduate holidays working on beef and diary farms in northern KZN and the Drakensberg. I had this dream of impacting agriculture somewhere in my future, whether in practice, extension or in education. I clung (and am still clinging) to this idea. But over the past few years this passion has been eroded. Part of it has to do with the current instability (not just the recent land debate issues but concerning the trade deals various other policies, both practical and socio-economic). This has made me sad, farming was once a strong part of my family and it has brought much joy and been the cause of much pain and loss. As much as a have a love for the art and the land I think I have lost my passion for it - and I am okay with that as I see that more and more I am being drawn towards a teaching and research career. I have a goal of impacting our environment at large rather than just one sector of it with the eventual hope of developing sustainable land use practices which surrounding communities can directly benefit from. Studying more pure ecology is allowing me to play a part in understanding the natural system as a whole rather than a small contingent of the various anthropogenically altered ecosystems. I'll grant that that's a broad aim but with fields like restoration ecology, urban ecology and even reconciliation ecology there is plenty of room to explore these unique and somewhat novel topics within our South African climate and culture.

But more personally my other thorn in my flesh is the way I occasionally relate with others. Some of the most challenging advice a friend has given me is to treat every conversation as a friendship generating interaction, something which is really quite difficult for me, particularly in the early stages of a relationship. I feel like I sometimes see these situations as a challenge and so I might be un-normally defensive or even offensive which sets a bad tone for future conversations and interactions and likely leaves a sour taste. It doesn't happen often but it has been coming up recently.

### 5.	Since the workshop, in your own environment (family, varsity, socially/with friends) where are you seeing new parts of yourself showing up as a leader or change agent? Share specific examples. What has influenced this change in you?

I have to admit that much of what I have done since July has been rather focused on my own work – not in a self centered way I don’t think but because I've made a few breakthroughs in my project that was somewhat stagnate up until the middle of August. I realist that this is just for a time. But together with this excitement has been another sideline project which was to develop an introductory [statistics course](https://saeon-r-intro.netlify.com/) for a group of Masters and PhD students affiliated with [SAEON](http://www.saeon.ac.za/) - part of the Department of Science and Technology. The goal here was to introduce a new skills suite which the students can apply directly to their own projects. This went really well and there are more of these workshops planned for later this year. A major aspect of this course is its open-source policy, all the content that we went through remains available online for the students to refer back to and for the participants to share with their colleagues.

I think both the Reconciliation Workshop and the Re-imagining Higher Education Symposium have both likely played an important role here. There seems to be a drive to break down barriers to learning. Whilst it might be difficult and likely dangerous to do away with the university in its entirety we can indeed increase accessibility to many of these skills. The department I am working is in currently undergoing a process to redesign some of their courses' content, something which I am fortunate enough to be a part of. One aspect which I am becoming involved in is to introduce modern IT applications for the biological sciences. For me, the main goal here is to make the content more relevant and accessible for students' needs within our department. To bring them up to speed with the latest computational technologies and methods to give them an edge for when they leave. However, the major challenge here will be to present this content in a manner that both exposes the students to potentially complex and challenging statistical and professional communication skills and bridges technological and conceptual barriers by introducing these topics in a clean, engaging and encouraging manner.